Oxford Bookworm's Play Scripts. Stage 1. Sherlock Holmes. Two plays.
By to Arthur Conan Doyle. Text Adaptation by John Escott.
Performed by Oxford University Dramatic Society.
Copyright, Oxford University Press 2000.
The Red-Headed League.
Scene 1. An interesting advertisement.
The inside of Wilson's shop.
It's a little shop with a lot of clocks, pictures, watches, etc.
Wilson is writing at a table. Vincent Spalding is looking at the morning chronicle newspaper.
This is interesting. What is? This advertisement.
It is interesting for you, Mr. Wilson, because you have red hair.
Go on.
The Red-Headed League want to find someone new. Do you know about them? Listen.
To all Red-Headed men, 21 years old or more, the Red-Headed League can now take a new man.
We pay £4 a week to do easy work.
Come to the league offices at seven popes court, Fleet Street, London.
On Monday at eleven o'clock. You can get £200 a year.
Really? Tell me about it.
A rich American with red hair began the league.
When he died, he gave a lot of his money to the Red-Headed League to give easy work to men with red hair.
It's very good wages for only a little work. Why don't you go along to popes court?
But millions of Red-Headed men walked out at millions.
You need to live in London.
But don't learn.
You must have very red hair. You have very red hair, Mr. Wilson.
Monday. Eleven o'clock.
It's Monday today, and it's nearly eleven o'clock. Come on.
Team two. Some easy work for Wilson. The office at popes court.
A room with only a table and two chairs. Duncan Ross, a man with very red hair, is sitting behind the table.
We can hear the noise of a lot of people out in the street.
That?
This is Mr. Jabez Wilson, and he wants to be in the league.
And he has a good head of hair. I can't remember when I saw a better head.
Ah! Stop it!
I'm sorry, but we must be careful. Of course it is your hair. I can see that now. Please sit down.
My name is Duncan Ross. Have you got a wife, Mr. Wilson? And children?
No. I have no wife and no family.
Oh, dear. Some of the men in our league have lots of red-headed children. We'd like that.
I'm sorry.
It's all right. You have that wonderful head of hair. When can you begin work here?
It's not easy. I have a shop and I can stay in the shop, Mr. Wilson. What hours must I work?
Ten o'clock to two o'clock.
And the wages?
Four pounds a week.
What must I do?
You must work here in the office all the time. That is very important. You cannot go out between the hours of ten o'clock and two o'clock.
And the work?
You must copy from this large book. And you must bring paper and a pen. Can you begin tomorrow?
Yes, I can.
Then goodbye, Mr. Java is Wilson.
Scene three. Wilson tells his story.
Sherlock Holmes' room. Holmes and Wilson are sitting in chairs. Holmes is smoking his pipe.
Wilson has the morning chronicle in his hands.
Most interesting, Mr. Wilson. Most interesting.
Holmes? I'm sorry.
Come in, my dear Watson.
This is Mr. Java's Wilson. He is telling me a very strange story.
This is Dr. Watson. He's a good friend. Give him the advertisement to read.
He does a lot of writing, Watson. Do you see?
Oh, how did you know that, Mr. Holmes?
The right arm of your coat is different from the left. Your arm is on the table when you write.
Yes, that's right.
It's very strange, Holmes.
It is strange, isn't it?
Do you see the day and month of the newspaper?
It's the morning chronicle of the 27th of April, 1890, two months ago.
Now, Mr. Wilson, tell us about your shop.
It's in Saxe-Coburg Square, Mr. Holmes. It's a little shop, and it doesn't make much money.
Does somebody help you in the shop?
Yes, a young man.
Well, he's not very young, but he works for half wages.
Does he? What's his name?
Vincent Spalding. He's very good at his work. He likes to take photographs when he's not working.
And he makes the pictures in my dark cellar, but he works well when he's in the shop.
How did you first see the newspaper advertisement?
Tell us that. Spalding saw it eight weeks ago,
and we went to Pope's court and saw Mr. Duncan Ross.
I told you about the visit a few minutes ago.
Yes, yes. And I can tell what's in about it later. What happened next?
Well, I was very pleased, Mr. Holmes.
I went home feeling very happy, but that evening I began to think again.
Copying from a book is strange work for a man to do, I thought.
Very strange, yes.
But the next morning I went to Pope's court with my pen and some paper.
Mr. Ross was there, but he soon went away. Then I began my work.
Well, I went in every morning at ten o'clock and went home at two.
And on Saturday Ross was in the office again and gave me my four pounds.
How long did you work there? Eight weeks.
But today I went to the office at ten o'clock and the door was locked.
This was on the door.
The red-headed league is finished. June the 23rd, 1890.
Then what did you do?
I went to the office in the next building and I asked the man,
what happened to the red-headed league?
Who are they? He asked,
who is the man at number seven? I asked.
The man with the red hair, he said,
his name is William Morris.
He moved out yesterday.
He has new offices at 17 King Edward Street.
Well, I went to King Edward Street, Mr. Holmes.
You did not find Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross, am I right?
You are?
What did you do then? I went home to Saxe-Koburg Square.
What does Spalding say about all this?
He says, wait for a letter. You're going to hear something.
What do you think? I need your help, I think.
You are right, Mr. Wilson. I'm happy to help you.
But first, I wanted to ask you one or two questions.
Mr. Spalding was the first to see the advertisement, yes?
Yes. When did he begin to work for you?
About three months ago. How did he come?
He answered an advertisement in the newspaper.
Was he the only man to answer it? No.
Twelve people answered it. Why did you take him?
Because he was cheap. He is happy to work for half the usual wages.
Yes. Tell me about him this Vincent Spalding.
He's small and a good, quick worker.
He's about thirty years old, I think.
Where is he now? He's at the shop.
That is all, Mr. Wilson. Today is Saturday.
I'm going to have an answer for you before Monday.
Thank you, Mr. Holmes.
We must work quickly, Watson. Put on your hat. We are going to Saxe-Koburg Square.
Scene four. Holmes meets Spalding.
Outside the shop in Saxe-Koburg Square.
Holmes is walking up and down.
Now and then he hits the ground outside the shop with his walking stick.
Then he hits the door of the shop.
Spalding opens the shop door and looks out.
The legs of his trousers are dirty.
Can I help you?
Yes. How can I get to the Strand?
Third on the right and fourth on the left.
He's a clever young man, Watson.
He is? Why did you ask about that?
He is? Why did you ask about the Strand? You know London very well.
You wanted to see him.
Not him. His trousers.
His trousers? I don't understand.
And why did you hit the ground with your stick?
My dear doctor, this is not the time for talking.
I must go and look at the roads behind Saxe-Koburg Square.
Are you going to your work?
Yes. I must go to the hospital.
I must go to the hospital.
I have things to do too.
But I want your help tonight.
Come at ten o'clock and Watson...
Yes, Holmes.
Bring your gum.
Scene five.
To catch a thief.
Sherlock Holmes' room.
Holmes, Jones and Maryweather are talking quietly.
Watson comes in.
Watson, you know Mr. Jones of Scotland Yard.
And this is Mr. Maryweather. They're coming with us tonight.
Hello, doctor. We meet again.
I'm here because I want to catch John Clay.
He's a killer and a thief.
One of the worst men in London.
It isn't going to be easy to catch him because he's very clever.
It's after ten o'clock. We must go.
Scene six.
Watching and waiting.
Inside the bank strongroom.
There are boxes on the floor.
It is dark.
The door opens and Holmes comes in, carrying a light.
Watson, Jones and Maryweather come after him.
Holmes looks carefully at the floor.
Maryweather sits on a box and hits the floor with his foot.
How do you leave?
No noise. Perhaps they can hear us.
How long before?
An hour. They're going to wait for Mr. Wilson to go to bed, then work quickly, I think.
We're in the strongroom of the first bank. Did you know that?
Mr. Maryweather works for the bank.
Tell Watson, Mr. Maryweather, what do the thieves want?
Our gold. It's in all these boxes.
Lots and lots of it. Gold.
We must wait in the dark. Get behind the boxes, everyone.
Things are going to happen in the next hour, I think.
When I hear or see anything strange, I'm going to come out quickly with a light.
And then you must help me.
Be ready with your god, Watson.
Is everything ready upstairs, Mr. Jones?
My men are waiting at the front door of the bank, Holmes.
They can't get out there.
Good. Now we must be quiet and wait.
It's 1115, Holmes.
Why?
Now, have you got... what?
You can't get away, John Clay.
No, but my friend.
There are three men waiting for him at the front door of the bank.
You think of everything, Mr. Holmes. You're very clever.
Your red-headed league was clever, too.
But I am pleased to catch the famous John Clay.
Scene seven. Holmes and Watson.
Sherlock Holmes' room.
Holmes and Watson are sitting in chairs.
Holmes is smoking his pipe.
They needed the red-headed league to get Mr. Wilson out of his shop.
Do you understand that?
Yes, I think.
Um, yes.
They wanted Wilson away from the shop for some hours every day.
But how could they do it?
Then Clay saw the colour of Ross' hair and thought of a red-headed league.
When Wilson answered their newspaper advertisement,
he went to work in their office every day.
Then they had time to make their towel.
Very clever.
So, Spalding is John Clay, the famous thief.
When did you first know that?
Spalding was happy to work for half wages.
Why, I thought.
Spalding often went down to the cellar.
What's he doing down there, I thought?
Suddenly, I thought about tunnels.
Is Spalding making a tunnel, I thought?
To another building?
Watson, you saw me hitting the ground with my stick outside the shop.
Yes.
Now I understand.
Was the cellar in front of the shop?
You wanted to know that.
Yes, I did.
And it wasn't.
The cellar was behind the shop.
Then I saw the man Spalding.
Did you see his trousers?
Yes, I saw them.
They were dirty, Watson.
Why?
Because making a tunnel is dirty work.
Very clever homes.
Then I went into the next street at the back of the shop.
And what did I see?
The first bank.
The bank, yes, of course.
Why is that young man making a tunnel, I thought?
To get into the bank's strongroom.
But why tonight?
How did you know?
Because they closed the offices of the red-headed league.
The tunnel must be ready, I thought.
And Saturday is a good day.
The bank does not open on Sunday.
Two days for the thieves to get away.
Ha ha!
But they didn't get away homes.
You're very clever.
That's very true, Watson.
The three students.
Scene one.
Hilton Somes' story.
Sherlock Holmes is sitting at a table, writing.
It is evening.
Watson comes in with Hilton Somes.
What was at the door, Watson?
This is Mr Hilton Somes Holmes.
He teaches at St Luke's College.
Can you give me some of your time, Mr Holmes?
Today something happened at the college, and I was very worried.
Then I thought the famous detective Sherlock Holmes is visiting our town.
Perhaps he can help.
I have a lot of work to do, Mr Somes.
Perhaps the police.
No, no.
I can't go to the police.
Well, tell me your story, Mr Somes.
Tomorrow is the first day of an important examination,
and I'm one of the examiners.
Today, at three o'clock, the three exam papers arrived for me to read.
Of course, every student would like to see these papers before they exam.
Ha ha.
Of course.
We are always very careful with them.
I began to read them, but at 4.30pm I went out to have tea
in a friend's rooms.
Where did you leave the papers?
They were on my writing table.
I locked my door and was away for an hour.
When I arrived home, I saw a key in my door.
Is it my key, I thought?
No, that's in my pocket.
Ah, it's Banister's key.
Banister is my servant.
Why did he go to your room this afternoon?
He brings my tea in every afternoon.
But you were at your friend's rooms.
Did he forget that?
Yes, and so his key was in my door.
He is usually careful, but...
Tell me about the examination papers.
Where were they when you went back to your room?
One was on a small table next to the window.
One was on the floor, and one on my writing table.
The first paper on the floor, the second in the window,
and the third on the writing table.
Yes, how did you know that?
Please, tell us more of your very interesting story, Mr. Stone.
First, I thought, did Banister look at the papers?
So I asked him, but he said, no, I did not.
And he is an honest man, Mr. Holmes.
What happened next?
Banister suddenly began to feel ill when I told him about the papers.
He sat down on a chair, and I gave him a strong drink.
Then I looked carefully at the table next to the window.
What did you find?
Small pieces of pencil.
Did somebody break and sharpen a pencil?
Yes, perhaps.
Yes, that was it.
Good. That helps.
Two more things.
I have a new writing table, but now there's a little cut on it.
And there was a piece of black mud on the table.
Is that all?
Yes.
Please help me, Mr. Holmes.
It's an interesting story, Mr. Serms.
Tell me, did any student visit you in your room after the papers arrived this afternoon?
Yes.
Daula Taras, a student from India.
And the papers were on your writing table?
Yes, but he couldn't read them.
He was two or three meters away.
But they were exam papers.
Could he see that?
Perhaps.
The examination papers were in your room.
Did anyone know that?
Did Banister know that?
No, nobody.
Where is Banister now?
When I ran out to find you, Mr. Holmes, he was on the chair in my room.
He looked very ill.
Did you leave your door open?
Yes.
But I locked the papers up first.
Come then.
We must go to your room.
Scene two.
Holmes visits the college.
Serms, Holmes and Watson come into Serms' living room.
Holmes walks to the window and looks out.
That window does not open, Mr. Holmes.
Nobody can enter the room through there.
Your servant isn't here now.
Perhaps he's feeling better.
Which chair did you leave him on?
The chair by the window.
Near this little table.
Yes.
Yes, of course.
The man comes in.
He takes the three papers from the writing table to carry them across to the window.
Because then he can see you when you come across the garden to the front door.
But he didn't see me because I walked in through the back door.
Ah, that helps.
Can I see the three papers now?
He carries this first paper across to the table near the window and begins to copy it.
It takes him ten minutes?
Fifteen, I think.
All right.
Fifteen.
Then he puts it down on the floor, gets the next paper and begins to copy that.
Then he hears you coming in the back door, Mr. Serms.
He must be quick.
He leaves the second paper on the table next to the window and runs.
Where?
Did you hear him running upstairs?
No, I didn't.
He's writing quickly because he breaks his pencil and needs to sharpen it again.
This is interesting.
The pencil was long and dark blue.
Look at these pieces.
And do you see the gold letters N-N?
It's at the end of a word.
Do you know Johann Faber pencils?
I do, Holmes.
I write for them.
This is the piece of black mud.
I can see the cut.
What is that door?
It opens into my bedroom.
Did you go into your bedroom before you ran out to find me?
No.
A man can hide behind this curtain.
What's this?
It's a mud again.
Your visitor was in this room, Mr. Serms.
But why?
Think for a minute.
He hears you coming.
What can he do?
He must hide.
So he runs into your bedroom and hides behind this curtain.
Oh!
Then he was in here.
When Vanister and I were in the next room.
Yes.
That's right.
Tell me, how many students live upstairs and go past your door?
Three.
All taking this examination.
Who are they?
There is Gilchrist.
He plays football and likes running.
His father was Sir Jabez Gilchrist.
He was a rich man, but he gambled his money away.
Young Gilchrist hasn't much money.
But he works hard.
And the Indian student?
Yes.
Dalat Ras is a quiet young man, but he works well.
Then there is Miles McLaren, a very clever young man.
But he doesn't study much, and he's worried about this examination.
So he would like to see the papers first?
Well, yes, perhaps.
Can we speak to Vanister, your servant?
Scene three.
Some questions for Vanister.
Insomes is living room.
Homes, Watson, and soams are sitting in chairs.
Homes is sitting at the writing table.
Vanister is standing in front of him.
Your key was in the door of this room today, Vanister.
Is that right?
Yes, sir.
I don't usually leave it there, but...
Tell me, when did you come into the room?
About 4.30pm, sir.
But Mr. saves his tea, but he wasn't here.
Did you look at the papers on the table?
No, sir.
Why did you leave the key in the door?
The tea things were in my hands.
I thought, I can come back for the key.
Did you forget to come back?
Yes, sir.
So the room was open all the time, and somebody in the room could get in or out?
Yes, yes, sir.
When Mr. Soams talked to you about the papers, you began to feel ill.
So you sat down on the chair over there.
Why did you go past the other chairs?
I... I don't know, sir.
Did you stay here when Mr. Soams ran out?
Only for a minute or two.
Then I locked the door and went to my room.
Mr. Soams, I would like to visit the three young gentlemen.
Is that all right?
Yes, of course.
These rooms are very old and very interesting.
Visitors often go to look at them.
Scene four.
Gilchrist.
Homes, Soams and Watson are outside the door of Gilchrist's room.
They are looking at the doorway.
Remember, gentlemen, you do not have a pencil with you.
What are you... I owe it to you, Mr. Soams.
Gilchrist, this is Mr. Holmes and his friend.
They are looking at the building.
Have you got a pencil, Watson?
This is a most interesting doorway and I want to draw it.
Oh, no. I'm sorry, Holmes.
Have you, Mr. Gilchrist?
A pencil? Oh, yes.
There you are, Mr. Holmes.
It is a beautiful building.
Ah, thank you.
Yes, Mr. Gilchrist.
A beautiful building.
Scene five.
Dalit Rass.
Homes, Watson and Soams are in Dalit Rass's room.
The Indian is walking up and down the room.
He looks worried.
Homes is drawing on a piece of paper.
A very interesting room, Soams.
Thank you, Mr. Ross.
Are you worried about something?
Sorry. What did you say?
Worried?
Oh, yes. It's the examination.
Is that all?
Yes, of course.
What?
Good evening, Mr. Ross.
Scene six.
Miles McLaren.
Homes, Watson and Soams are outside the door of Miles McLaren's room.
Go away. I'm busy.
I can't see anybody. Go away at once.
McLaren.
This is Mr.
away. I'm busy. I can't see anybody.
Go away at once.
McLaren. This is Mr.
away. It's the examination tomorrow.
I must study.
Come, my friends. It is not important.
I'm sorry, Mr. Holmes, but is he a tall young man?
Tall? No.
McLaren isn't tall.
Gilchrist is the tallest of the three.
Good.
And now, Mr. Soams, good night.
What?
Are you going?
But tomorrow is the examination.
What can I do?
How are you going to take the pieces of pencil and the mud with me?
Don't worry. I'm going to come back tomorrow morning with the answer.
Scene seven.
Homes is thinking.
Homes is room.
He and Watson are sitting in chairs.
What do you think, Watson?
Who began to copy the papers?
McLaren. He said, go away.
But did he want to hide something?
Or perhaps the student from India, Mr. Ross, he looked very worried.
Many people are worried before an examination, Watson.
It is nothing. And the pencil was no help to us.
What about Soams is servant?
Manister. He's an honest man, Soams says.
That's true, I think.
Yeah. So why did an honest man...
Oh, dear. I must think.
Where's my pipe, Watson?
Scene eight.
All the answers to all the questions.
Soams is room.
It is morning.
A very worried Soams is bringing homes and Watson into the room.
Well, Mr. Holmes, can we have the examination later this morning?
Or must I stop it?
You can have the examination, Mr. Soams.
But the young man isn't going to take it.
You know him?
Yes, I do. Please call Bannister.
You have the answer, Holmes?
Yes, my dear Watson. Look.
Three. There were only two pieces of mud yesterday.
Where did the third piece come from?
Now, Bannister. I want the true story. What happened yesterday?
I told you everything, sir.
You have nothing more to say.
Then I must tell you.
When Mr. Soams called you into the room yesterday, you saw something on that chair,
and you sat on it before Mr. Soams could see it.
No, sir.
Yes. And when Mr. Soams went out to find me, you opened the door and said,
you can come out now to the man hiding behind the curtain.
There was no man, sir.
That isn't true.
But please go and stand next to the bedroom door.
Soams, please go and ask young Gilchrist to come down.
Mr. Gilchrist, there are only the five of us to hear your answer to my question.
Why did you copy the examination papers yesterday?
No, Mr. Gilchrist, sir. I never said anything.
No. But you are helping us now, Bannister.
Tell us, Mr. Gilchrist.
You did something very wrong, Gilchrist.
But you're sorry now. I can see that.
I'm going to tell you the story, Soams.
Mr. Gilchrist first saw the papers through the window.
But nobody can get in through the window.
That's true. But a very tall man can look through it from the garden.
I could not understand this cut, but then I remembered.
Gilchrist likes running.
But how does that help, Holmes?
Think, Watson.
This young man went running yesterday afternoon.
When he walked home, his running shoes were in his hands.
And running shoes have spikes, of course.
Yes, Gilchrist went past this window and looked in.
He's a tall young man, you see.
He saw the exam papers on the writing table.
Then he went past Soams's door and saw the key in it.
And he went into the room and put his shoes on the writing table.
And a spike cut into it.
Yes, Watson.
What did you put on that chair near the window?
My watch.
He puts his watch on the chair, then begins to copy one of the papers.
I'm going to see Mr. Soams when he comes back across the garden, he thinks.
But you walk in through the back door, Soams.
Then what?
Gilchrist hears you coming.
Quickly takes his running shoes and runs into your bedroom to hide.
One shoe leaves some black mud behind the curtain.
Is this all true, Mr. Gilchrist?
I found the same black mud on your shoes.
Yes, sir. It's true.
Have you nothing more to say?
I have a letter here, Mr. Soams.
Early this morning I began to write to you.
It says, I'm not going to take the examination.
I'm going to South Africa to work for the police there.
I see.
You're not going to take the examination now.
I'm pleased to hear that.
Mr. Bennister talked to me.
This is the right thing to do.
I understand that now.
Gilchrist was in the bedroom, Bennister, and you didn't tell Mr. Soams.
When you saw Gilchrist's watch, you sat on it to hide it.
Why?
Well, sir, I was once assigned to Sir Jabez, Gilchrist, this young gentleman's father.
Ah! When he gambled his money away, I moved to the college to be a servant.
But I always remembered Sir Jabez.
He was good to me.
So I did everything to help his son here.
And yesterday, when Mr. Soams called me yesterday, I saw Mr. Gilchrist's watch on the chair.
He looked at the examination papers, I thought.
And I quickly sat down on the watch before Mr. Soams saw it.
Then Mr. Soams visited me.
Yes, sir. And I called young Mr. Gilchrist.
You looked at the exam papers, I said to him.
Did you copy them?
Yes, he said. I did.
Then you cannot take the exam, I said.
Think of your father.
He was an honest man, and you must be honest too.
I wanted to stop him, Mr. Holmes.
You were right, Bennister.
Well, Soams, you have your answers now.
And you young man did wrong. But you're going to put things right.
You can thank Bennister for that.
I do thank him, sir.
Come, Watson. Our work is finished here.
Yes, Holmes.